.\"
.\" Devin Reade, 1997.  Updated 2026 for fork2→fork merge.
.\"
.\" $Id: fork.2,v 1.3 2026/04/10 00:00:00 smentzer Exp $
.\"
.TH FORK 2 GNO "10 April 2026" "System Calls"
.SH NAME
.BR fork ,
.BR vfork
\- start a new process from inside the current application space
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <unistd.h>
.sp 1
int
\fBfork\fR (void *\fIproc\fR, unsigned short \fIstack\fR,
unsigned short \fIprio\fR, char *\fIprocname\fR,
unsigned short \fInumargs\fR, ...);
.br
int
\fBvfork\fR (void *\fIproc\fR, unsigned short \fIstack\fR,
unsigned short \fIprio\fR, char *\fIprocname\fR,
unsigned short \fInumargs\fR, ...);
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR fork
causes the creation of a new process.
.LP
.BR fork 's
argument
.IR proc
is typically the address of a C function, although it can be any valid
address inside the IIgs RAM space.  In a successful
.BR fork
call, the parent process resumes execution by returning from
.BR fork
and, under GNO, the child process resumes execution at the entry into function
.IR proc .
This is different from traditional Unix implementations.
.LP
The remaining arguments control the child's execution environment:
.RS
.IP \fIstack\fR
is the number of bytes of stack to allocate to the process. If
.I stack
is not a multiple of 256, then it
is rounded up to the next highest multiple of 256 bytes.
.IP \fIprio\fR
is the priority to assign to the process. Priorities are not currently
implemented, and you should pass 0 for this argument.
.IP \fIprocname\fR
is a string you can have associated with the process when viewing
the process table (See
.BR ps (1)).
Pass NULL if no name is needed.
.IP \fInumargs\fR
is the number of (16-bit)
.B words
of arguments which follow, not the
number of arguments.
Any arguments following
.I numargs
are passed as parameters to the child's procedure.
A 4-byte pointer counts as 2 words.
.RE
.LP
.BR fork
creates a new entry in the process table, and sets up default settings
for the new process.  The
process is executed in 16-bit full native mode, and the registers upon
entry to the routine are set as follows:
.RS
.nf

A	the userID assigned to the new process
X	0
Y	0
.fi
.RE
.LP
The child inherits the memory shadowing and machine state parameters of
the parent, as well as signal blocking information and the ID of the
controlling TTY. In addition, the child inherits all the open
files of its parent.
.LP
A forked process may share code with other children or the parent.
However, this is only allowed in a forward manner; any forked process
that exits by function return will be terminated.  Note that any shared
global variables will need to be moderated with some type of mutual
exclusion, either the kernel
.BR semaphore (2)
routines or custom routines.  This includes C stdio routines.
.LP
Under GNO,
.BR vfork
is identical to
.BR fork .
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success
.BR fork
and
.BR vfork
return to the parent the process ID of the new (child) process.
On failure, -1 is returned and
.B errno
is set.
.SH CAVEATS
The
.IR proc
argument must not be NULL.  Passing NULL causes the child to execute
from address $000000 and crash immediately.
.LP
Care must be taken such that the child process does not call
.BR exit (3)
either directly or by function call, since
.BR exit
will flush and close standard I/O data structures.  Instead, if
the child process does not or cannot
.BR execve (2),
it should call
.BR _exit (3).
.LP
Because
.BR fork
is called from the kernel (which is implemented as a user
tool set), the child function
.IR proc
must restore the data bank register if it is going to access global
variables.  See the description of the
.BR databank
pragma in the ORCA/C Reference Manual for details.
.SH CONFORMANCE
Most Unix
.BR fork s
take no parameters; they copy the entire address space of the calling
process and return with a different value in the parent and child.  Due
to hardware limitations, this sort of manipulation isn't possible on
the IIgs.  Unix programs utilizing
.BR fork
will have to be modified slightly to work under GNO.
.LP
The implementation of
.BR fork
is therefore not POSIX conforming, nor is the implementation of
.BR vfork
conforming to traditional Unix implementations.
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf

#pragma databank 1
void proc1(int argc, char *argv[])
{
   /* child code here -- use _exit(), not exit() */
   ...
   _exit(0);
}
#pragma databank 0

int main (int argc, char **argv) {
   ...
   pid = fork(proc1, 1024, 0, "sub-process", 3, argc, argv);
   ...
   return 0;
}

.fi
.SH HISTORY
.B fork
in GNO 2.1.0 merges the functionality of the former
.B fork2
(which first appeared in XINU) into a single call.
The old single-argument
.B fork
has been removed.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR occ (1),
.BR exec (2),
.BR execve (2),
.BR semaphore (2),
.BR wait (2),
the
.IR "GNO Kernel Reference Manual" ,
and the
.IR "ORCA/C Reference Manual" .
